docs(nx-plugin): add recipe for creating and testing a create-x package (#17841)
nrwl/nx: docs/shared/recipes/plugins/create-install-package.md

# Creating an Install Package

{% youtube
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ocllb5KEXZk"
title="Build your own CLI"
width="100%" /%}

> 

Reviewer: It would be good to have a few sentences as an intro here.  The title is "Creating an Install Package" and you immediately start talking about a preset.  My first thought as the reader is "did I land on the wrong page?"

> A [Nx Plugin Preset](/extending-nx/recipes/create-preset) allows you to take control over the shape of an Nx workspace setup, so you can customize it to best fit your situation. This is possible because a preset can be passed directly to the `create-nx-workspace` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An [Nx Plugin Preset](/extending-nx/recipes/create-preset) allows you to take control over the shape of an Nx workspace setup, so you can customize it to best fit your situation. This is possible because a preset can be passed directly to the `create-nx-workspace` command:
```

```shell
npx create-nx-workspace --preset my-plugin
```

You might however want to create your own `create-{x}` package, whether that's for marketing purposes or easier discovery. When a package named create-{x} is published to npm, it can be invoked via any of the following:

- npx create-{x}
- yarn create {x}
- npm init {x}
- pnpm init {x}

> These packages are used to set up a new project in some form. As an example, consider `create-nx-plugin`, `create-nx-workspace`, or perhaps `create-react-app`.

Reviewer: I can't tell when you're talking about how npm handles packages that start with `create-*` and when you're talking about what Nx can do for you.  Maybe having a heading for the above section would make it clearer.

> ## Generating a "Create Package"

Reviewer: You need some transition text before this section explaining how Nx helps you to create packages that work with npm's `create-*` feature and the rest of the article explains how to use it.

There are a few methods to create a package that will work with `create-nx-workspace`'s public API to setup a new workspace that uses your Nx plugin.

You can setup a new Nx plugin workspace and immediately pass the `--create-package-name`:

```shell
npx create-nx-plugin my-plugin --create-package-name create-my-plugin
```

Alternatively, if you already have an existing Nx plugin workspace, you can run the following generator to set up a new create package:

```shell
nx g create-package create-my-plugin --project my-plugin
```

## Customize your create package

You'll have 2 packages that are relevant in your workspace:

- The create package (e.g. `create-my-plugin`)
- The plugin package (e.g. `my-plugin`)

> Let's take a look at the code that was scaffolded out for your create-my-plugin package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a look at the code that was scaffolded out for your `create-my-plugin` package:
```

```typescript {% fileName="packages/create-my-plugin/bin/index.ts" %}
#!/usr/bin/env node

import { createWorkspace } from 'create-nx-workspace';

async function main() {
  const name = process.argv[2]; // TODO: use libraries like yargs or enquirer to set your workspace name
  if (!name) {
    throw new Error('Please provide a name for the workspace');
  }

  console.log(`Creating the workspace: ${name}`);

  // This assumes "my-plugin" and "create-my-plugin" are at the same version
  // eslint-disable-next-line @typescript-eslint/no-var-requires
  const presetVersion = require('../package.json').version;

  // TODO: update below to customize the workspace
  const { directory } = await createWorkspace(`my-plugin@${presetVersion}`, {
    name,
    nxCloud: false,
    packageManager: 'npm',
  });

  console.log(`Successfully created the workspace: ${directory}.`);
}

main();
```

> This is a plain node script at this point, and you can use any dependencies you wish to handle things like prompting or argument parsing. Keeping dependencies small and splitting out the command line tool from the Nx plugin is recommended, and will help keep your CLI feel fast and snappy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a plain node script at this point, and you can use any dependencies you wish to handle things like prompting or argument parsing. Keeping dependencies small and splitting out the command line tool from the Nx plugin is recommended, and will help keep your CLI feeling fast and snappy.
```

Note the following code snippet:

```typescript
const { directory } = await createWorkspace(`my-plugin@${presetVersion}`, {
  name,
  nxCloud: false,
  packageManager: 'npm',
});
```

This will invoke the `my-plugin` package's `preset` generator, which will contain the logic for setting up the workspace. This preset generator will be invoked when running either `npx create-nx-workspace --preset my-plugin` or `npx create-my-plugin`. For more information about customizing your preset, see: [Creating a Preset](/extending-nx/recipes/create-preset).

## Testing your create package

> Because your create-my-plugin package will install your plugin package at runtime, both packages must be published in order to run them and see the results. To test your packages without making them publicly available, a `local-registry` target should be present on project in your workspace's root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because your `create-my-plugin` package will install your plugin package at runtime, both packages must be published in order to run them and see the results. To test your packages without making them publicly available, a `local-registry` target should be present on the project in your workspace's root.
```

```jsonc {% fileName="project.json" %}
{
  ...
  "targets": {
    "local-registry": {
      "executor": "@nx/js:verdaccio",
      "options": {
        "port": 4873,
        "config": ".verdaccio/config.yml",
        "storage": "tmp/local-registry/storage"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> _(If you don't have such a target, refer to the following [docs page to generate one](/packages/js/generators/setup-verdaccio))_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_(If you don't have a `local-registry` target, refer to the following [docs page to generate one](/packages/js/generators/setup-verdaccio))_
```

Note, after terminating the terminal window where the `nx local-registry` command is running (e.g. using `CTRL+c` or `CMD+c`) the registry will be stopped, previously installed packages will be cleaned up and the npm/yarn/pnpm registries will be restored to their original state, pointing to the real NPM servers again.
{% /callout %}

Next, you can **publish** your packages to your new local registry. All of the generated packages have a `publish` target, so you can simply run:

```shell
npx nx run-many --targets publish --ver 1.0.0 --tag latest
```

Once the packages are published, you should be able to test the behavior of your "create package" as follows:

```shell
npx create-my-plugin test-workspace
```

## Writing and running e2e tests

When setting up the workspace, you should also have gotten a `my-plugin-e2e` package. This package contains the e2e tests for your plugin, and can be run with the following command:

```shell
npx nx e2e my-plugin-e2e
```

Have a look at some of the example tests that were generated for you. When running these tests,

- the local registry will be started automatically
- a new version of the packages will be deployed

> - then your test commands will be run (usually triggering processes that setup the workspace, just like the user would type them into a command line interface)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- then your test commands will be run (usually triggering processes that setup the workspace, just like the user would type into a command line interface)
```

- once the test commands have finished, the local registry will be stopped again and cleaned up

## Publishing your create package

> Your plugin and create package will both need to be published to NPM to be useable. Publishing your packages is exactly the same as described [previously](#testing-your-create-package), except that won't launch the local registry but rather publish to the real NPM servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your plugin and create package will both need to be published to NPM to be useable. Publishing your packages is exactly the same as described [previously](#testing-your-create-package), except that you don't run the `local-registry` task so that the `publish` task will publish to the real NPM servers.
```
